PREOPS-1335: Fall 2022 LSST Science Community Research Proposal Support (#9)
lsst/rtn-011: data.tex

\section{Early Science Data Products}
\label{sec:data}

All Rubin Observatory LSST data products are produced by the LSST Science Pipelines \cite{2019ASPC..523..521B,2018PASJ...70S...5B}. 
For an introduction to the Rubin data products, see \citet{RubinDataProductsAbridged}.
Here we provide a summary of the data products that are expected to be made available as part of the \esp.

> Each pre-operations data preview and survey data release will be accompanied by its own release-specific DPDD, giving e.g. the  database schema for the catalogs included in that dataset.

Reviewer: I'm not sure if it makes sense to make DPDD a generic term as you've done in this paragraph

Reviewer 2: release-specific data products description?

All Rubin Observatory LSST data products are produced by the LSST Science Pipelines \cite{2019ASPC..523..521B,2018PASJ...70S...5B}. 
For an introduction to the Rubin data products, see \citet{RubinDataProductsAbridged}.
Here we provide a summary of the data products that are expected to be made available as part of the \esp.

Each pre-operations data preview and survey data release will be accompanied by its own release-specific DPDD, giving e.g. the  database schema for the catalogs included in that dataset.
For an example data release DPDD, see the online DP0.2 documentation.\footnote{\url{https://dp0-2.lsst.io/data-products-dp0-2/}}

The Rubin data rights policy is described in  \cite{RDO-013}.

\subsection{Prompt data products}

> Prompt data products are described in detail in the Data Products Definition Document (\DPDD).

Reviewer: Not sure why we struck this line--the DPDD is still the best overall reference to our planned data products.

> Data products for transients, variables, and moving objects will be primarily produced by the Prompt Processing pipelines, which will perform reduction, calibration, difference image analysis (DIA), source detection and measurement, and alert distribution within 60 seconds of image readout. 

Reviewer 3: "variables" -> "variable"

> Prompt image data products will be made available 80 hours following camera readout. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During routine LSST operations, prompt image data products will be made available 80 hours following camera readout. 
```

do we need to say here or elsewhere that images will not be available for commissioning data in less than 30 days?   do we make commissioning PP images available prior to DP1/2?  Tables 3 and 4 suggest not

> Catalog data producs will be available after 24 hours. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Catalog data products will be available after 24 hours. 
```

The image differencing source (\DIASource), forced photometry (\DIAForcedSource), and object (\DIAObject and \SSObject)
catalog data products are all public. 

> Access to both prompt image and catalog data products is via the Rubin Science Platform (\S~\ref{ssec:dataaccess}) and queryable using VO interfaces. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rubin Data Rights holders can access both prompt image and catalog data products via the Rubin Science Platform (\S~\ref{ssec:dataaccess}) and query using VO interfaces. 
```

\DIASource, \DIAForcedSource, \DIAObject, and \SSObject catalogs are queryable using VO interfaces to the Prompt Products Database.

> Alert are triggered by sources detected with SNR>5 via difference image analysis (DIA) and transmitted to community alert brokers for the list of selected brokers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alert are triggered by sources detected with SNR>5 via difference image analysis (DIA) and transmitted to selected community alert brokers \footnote{Selected brokers are listed at \url{https://www.lsst.org/scientists/alert-brokers}}.
```

> The real-time alert stream is public. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alert packets transmitted to these brokers are world-public.
```

Similarly, daily Solar System Processing identifies new Solar System Objects from difference image sources and reports those publicly to the Minor Planet Center.

Catalog data products, as well as services for running user-generated processing on the data, are available to Rubin Data Rights holders after 24 hours through the Rubin Science Platform (\S~\ref{ssec:dataaccess}).
\DIASource, \DIAObject, and \SSObject catalogs are queryable using VO interfaces to the Prompt Products Database.

> Image products are available after 80 hours.

Reviewer: this paragraph repeats much of what is above

Reviewer 2: arrgh - forgot to remove the older text when I rewrote this part. Consolidated now.

\subsection{Data Release data products}

> Static science datasets for Early Science will flow from the \svs in commissioning.

Reviewer: DRP doesn't just provide static sky science, though....

Reviewer 2: no ...

Images and catalogs from the DRP of the commissioning data will be made available to data rights holders in the form of Data Previews via the access mechanisms described in \S~\ref{ssec:dataaccess}.
Due to the relatively short time periods available for commissioning observations (\S~\ref{ssec:scenarios}), these Data Previews will necessarily be limited in their area and temporal coverage relative to full Data Releases, however all Data Preview data products will be in the same science data model format as for future Data Releases.

\subsection{Access to \es data products}\label{ssec:dataaccess}

> Alerts will be accessible by the community via one or more of the nine Rubin-endorsed Community Brokers\footnote{See \url{https://www.lsst.org/scientists/alert-brokers}.}

Reviewer 3: The period needs to be outside the footnote.
